Review Report for
“Condensed-space methods for nonlinear programming on
GPUs”

Summary
This paper presents numerical experiments comparing diﬀerent linear solvers in the context of an
interior-point method (IPM) applied to a few nonlinear programming (NLP) instances, including
ACOPF, PGLIB and COPS. Speciﬁcally, it evaluates the performance of HSL MA27, a CPUbased linear solver for the original KKT system, against cuDSS, a GPU-based linear solver for
the condensed-space approaches (LiftedKKT and HyKKT). While the results on ACOPF instances
suggest some advantages for cuDSS on condensed-space methods, the results on several COPS
instances are inconsistent.

Evaluation
I had high expectations upon reading the title and abstract of the paper. However, upon further
reading, I found that the numerical results fall short of providing suﬃcient evidence and justiﬁcations for the claims made in the paper. One potential path towards a successful submission is
to rerun experiments with the standard benchmark set of nonlinear programming, i.e., CUTEst
benchmark set and Mittelmann benchmark set, and draw the conclusion from a comprehensive numerical test. Given that such an expansion would lead to a fundamentally diﬀerent paper, I must
recommend a rejection in the current form.

Major Comments
1. One major concern is that the experiments are limited to speciﬁc classes of problems, such as
ACOPF, COPS, and PGLIB. While these are certainly important classes of NLP problems,
they are not suﬃciently representative to draw generalized conclusions for all NLP problems.
If the authors wish to make claims for NLP in general, a broader set of experiments involving
benchmarks like CUTEst and Mittelmann is required.
2. The key claim of the paper, as stated in the contributions, is that "The ﬁndings reveal that
the condensed-space IPM enables a remarkable ten-fold speedup in solving large-scale OPF
instances using the GPU. However, performance on the COPS benchmark exhibits more
variability." There are several issues with this claim:

1

(a) The use of condensed-space IPM with GPU acceleration for OPF has already been
studied in the authors’ previous work [37]. It is unclear how the contributions of this
paper diﬀer signiﬁcantly from that prior work.
(b) The results presented in Table 4 for a limited number of COPS instances do not paint
a consistent picture, making it unclear what the central message is. Is the claim that
cuDSS or GPU does not oﬀer clear advantages over CPU-based methods for general
problems?
(c) The observation that GPU performance depends signiﬁcantly on the sparsity pattern of
the matrix is expected. However, the scientiﬁc contribution of this observation is not
apparent and needs further justiﬁcation.
3. In the context of NLP interior-point methods, the evaluation of Hessian and gradient information often represents a signiﬁcant portion of the overall runtime. However, this aspect is
not discussed in the paper, despite the general claims made about NLP.

Minor Comments
1. The title "Condensed-space methods for nonlinear programming on GPUs" is too broad.
The title should reﬂect the speciﬁc scope of the experiments, and explicitly mention that it
concerns interior-point methods, and also the claim for NLP is too broad with the scientiﬁc
ﬁndings in the paper as stated above.
2. The condition number analysis in Section 4 is fairly standard. It would be helpful for the
authors to clarify how this analysis contributes to the novelty of the paper.
3. The meaning of each column in Tables 1-4 requires more detailed explanations. For example,
what do "it", "init", and "lin" mean in Table 4? What does "analysis" refer to in Table 1
(e.g., is it the ordering step)? And many others.
4. The ﬁrst sentence of the contributions section, "In this article, we assess the current capabilities of modern GPUs to solve large-scale nonconvex nonlinear programs to optimality,"
overstates the scope of the paper.
5. HyKKT and LiftedKKT have been proposed in previous work. The authors should clearly
articulate what new insights or conclusions this study provides that were not known before.
6. Solvers like IPOPT and Knitro should be compared with to understand the scope and performance of these new GPU-based interior-point methods.

2

